---
title: 'SmilesDB: A SMILES-first molecular database API'
tags:
  - database
  - SMILES
  - molecules
  - python
  - web
authors:
  - name: William C. Choi-Kim
    orcid: 0009-0000-3902-4745
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - index: 1
    name: Cy-Fair Senior High School
date: 27 June 2025
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

`SmilesDB` is a database and API that stores 5,479 both small and complex molecules in the SMILES string format. It includes a web-based database UI and a free and open API. Each molecule includes its SMILES identifier as well as atom counts, bond counts, and other molecular information generated by RDKit.

# Statement of need

SMILES strings are a compact, powerful format for storing molecule data. They are widely supported and backed by an extensive realm of theory and software. However, the SMILES specification is not generally adopted in large molecular databases and is usually provided as a property of stored molecules.

`SmilesDB` was first designed as a result of a previous project's need for large numbers of proteins to test new algorithms in WolframLanguage. Importing SMILES strings into WolframLanguage is well-supported, so the project called for a database of SMILES strings. Finding a lack of such a database, `SmilesDB` was built with data from the `BindingDB` [@chembl] and the `ChemBL` [@bindingdb] databases. Storing molecules in SMILES strings enables a total database size of under 2 megabytes. The SmilesDB database and server code has been archived to Zenodo [@Choi-Kim_2025].

# State of the Field
The SMILES specification was proprietary in its early days and is now insufficient in many cases to store enough chemical information to provide relevant molecule specifications for many modern use-cases. Additionally, as a result of its proprietary beginnings, there are multiple branching open SMILES specifications, leading to inconsistencies between chemical tools. 

However, SMILES remains one of the most efficient human-readable formats in which to store basic molecular data, and with the modern specification, it is possible to store more advanced data - including isomerism and ring closures.

Existing databases - most significantly, BindingDB [@bindingdb] - do include SMILES strings but fail to make them easily accessible en-masse or possible to query through an API.

# Functionality

## Online API

The core functionality of SmilesDB is as a web-app and online API with easily accessible endpoints. When self-hosted, these endpoints remain accessible but at a localhost address returned by the `Flask` [@flask] start command.

## Integrating the API
Because the `SmilesDB` API is open and can be requested from any programming language with a http request framework, integrating `SmilesDB` into existing projects is simple. 

For example, in `WolframLanguage` [@wolframInterface], integration is as simple as:
```mathematica
getRandom[n_Integer] := # -> Molecule[#] & /@ ImportString[
    URLRead[
        "https://smilesdb.org/api/smiles/random/" <> ToString[n]
      , "Body"]
   , "JSON"]
```

This simple integration brings all of SmilesDB into WolframLanguage, and output can be formatted like in \autoref{fig:wolframOutput}.

![Formatted output from `getRandom[3]`. \label{fig:wolframOutput}](short3.jpg) 

# Available Data
Each molecule in `SmilesDB` includes data from RDKit [@rdkit] as well as a SMILES string identifier. The full database can be queried using the online API at [smilesdb.org/api](https://smilesdb.org/api) with a variety of dynamic endpoints for any number of molecules.

# Acknowledgements

Thank you to Dr. Jason Sonnenberg for his support during the early stages of this project.

# References